Writing and formatting
File format
We ask you to provide editable source files for your entire submission (including figures, tables and text graphics). Some guidelines:

Save files in an editable format, using the extension .doc/.docx for Word files and .tex for LaTeX files. A PDF is not an acceptable source file.

Format Word files in a single-column layout. Double-column formatting is only permitted for LaTeX submissions.

Remove any strikethrough and underlined text from your manuscript, unless it has scientific significance related to your article.

Use spell-check and grammar-check functions to avoid errors.

We advise you to read our Step-by-step guide to publishing with Elsevier.

LaTeX
We encourage you use our LaTeX template when preparing a LaTeX submission. You will be asked to provide all relevant editable source files upon submission or revision.

Support for your LaTeX submission:

LaTeX submission instructions and templates

Journal Article Publishing Support Center LaTeX FAQs and support

Researcher Academy’s Beginners’ guide to writing a manuscript in LaTeX

Title page
You are required to include the following details in the title page information:

Article title. Article titles should be concise and informative. Please avoid abbreviations and formulae, where possible, unless they are established and widely understood, e.g. DNA.

Author names. Provide the given name(s) and family name(s) of each author. The order of authors should match the order in the submission system. Carefully check that all names are accurately spelled. If needed, you can add your name between parentheses in your own script after the English transliteration.

Affiliations. Add affiliation addresses, referring to where the work was carried out, below the author names. Indicate affiliations using a lower-case superscript letter immediately after the author's name and in front of the corresponding address. Ensure that you provide the full postal address of each affiliation, including the country name and, if available, the email address of each author.

Corresponding author. Clearly indicate who will handle correspondence for your article at all stages of the refereeing and publication process and also post-publication. This responsibility includes answering any future queries about your results, data, methodology and materials. It is important that the email address and contact details of your corresponding author are kept up to date during the submission and publication process.

Present/permanent address. If an author has moved since the work described in your article was carried out, or the author was visiting during that time, a "present address" (or "permanent address") can be indicated by a footnote to the author's name. The address where the author carried out the work must be retained as their main affiliation address. Use superscript Arabic numerals for such footnotes.

Abstract
You are required to provide a concise and factual abstract which does not exceed 250 words. The abstract should briefly state the purpose of your research, principal results and major conclusions. Some guidelines:

Abstracts must be able to stand alone as abstracts are often presented separately from the article.

Avoid references. If any are essential to include, ensure that you cite the author(s) and year(s).

Avoid non-standard or uncommon abbreviations. If any are essential to include, ensure they are defined within your abstract at first mention.

Keywords
You are required to provide 1 to 7 keywords for indexing purposes. Keywords should be written in English. Please try to avoid keywords consisting of multiple words (using "and" or "of").

We recommend that you only use abbreviations in keywords if they are firmly established in the field.

Highlights
You are encouraged to provide article highlights at submission.

Highlights are a short collection of bullet points that should capture the novel results of your research as well as any new methods used during your study. Highlights will help increase the discoverability of your article via search engines. Some guidelines:

Submit highlights as a separate editable file in the online submission system with the word "highlights" included in the file name.

Highlights should consist of 3 to 5 bullet points, each a maximum of 85 characters, including spaces.

We encourage you to view example article highlights and read about the benefits of their inclusion.

Graphical abstract
You are required to provide a graphical abstract at submission.

The graphical abstract summarizes the contents of your article in a concise, pictorial, professional form, highlighting important aspects of the research. It is designed to appeal to an interdisciplinary audience, and draw more attention to your online article. Some guidelines:

Ensure you have obtained the necessary permission to include any third party owned material in a graphical abstract.

Use of generative AI or AI-assisted tools in the production of graphical abstracts must align with Elsevier’s GenAI Policies for Journals.

Submit your graphical abstract as a separate file in the online submission system.

Ensure the image is 531 x 1328 pixels (h x w) or proportionally more, and is readable at a size of 5 x 13 cm.

Preferred file types for graphical abstracts are TIFF, EPS, PDF or MS Office files.

More information, examples and a template can be found in the graphical abstract guidelines.

Math formulae
Submit math equations as editable text, not as images.

Present simple formulae in line with normal text, where possible.

Use the solidus (/) instead of a horizontal line for small fractional terms such as X/Y.

Present variables in italics.

Denote powers of e by exp.

Display equations separately from your text, numbering them consecutively in the order they are referred to within your text.

Tables
Tables must be submitted as editable text, not as images. Some guidelines:

Place tables next to the relevant text or on a separate page(s) at the end of your article.

Cite all tables in the manuscript text.

Number tables consecutively according to their appearance in the text.

Please provide captions along with the tables.

Place any table notes below the table body.

Avoid vertical rules and shading within table cells.

We recommend that you use tables sparingly, ensuring that any data presented in tables is not duplicating results described elsewhere in the article.

Figures, images and artwork
Figures, images, artwork, diagrams and other graphical media must be supplied as separate files along with the manuscript. We recommend that you read our detailed artwork and media instructions. Some excerpts:

When submitting artwork:

Cite all images in the manuscript text.

Number images according to the sequence they appear within your article.

Submit each image as a separate file using a logical naming convention for your files (for example, Figure_1, Figure_2 etc).

Text graphics may be embedded in the text at the appropriate position. If you are working with LaTeX, text graphics may also be embedded in the file.

Figure captions
All images must have a caption. A caption should consist of a brief title (not displayed on the figure itself) and a description of the image. We advise you to keep the amount of text in any image to a minimum, though any symbols and abbreviations used should be explained.

Read how to add captions to your submission here.

Artwork formats
When your artwork is finalized, "save as" or convert your electronic artwork to the formats listed below taking into account the given resolution requirements for line drawings, halftones, and line/halftone combinations:

Vector drawings: Save as EPS or PDF files embedding the font or saving the text as "graphics."

Color or grayscale photographs (halftones): Save as TIFF, JPG or PNG files using a minimum of 300 dpi (for single column width: min. 1063 pixels, full page width: 2244 pixels).

Bitmapped line drawings: Save as TIFF, JPG or PNG files, using a minimum of 1000 dpi (for single column width: min. 3543 pixels, full page width: 7480 pixels).

Combinations bitmapped line/halftones (color or grayscale): Save as TIFF, JPG or PNG files using a minimum of 500 dpi (for single column: min. 1772 pixels, full page width: 3740 pixels).

Please do not submit:

Files that are too low in resolution.

Disproportionally large images compared to font size, as text may become unreadable.

Color artwork
If you submit usable color figures with your accepted article, we will ensure that they appear in color online.

Please ensure that color images are accessible to all, including those with impaired color vision. Learn more about color and web accessibility.

Generative AI and Figures, images and artwork
Please read our policy on the use of generative AI and AI-assisted tools in figures, images and artwork, which can be found in Elsevier’s GenAI Policies for Journals. This policy states:

We do not permit the use of Generative AI or AI-assisted tools to create or alter images in submitted manuscripts.

The only exception is if the use of AI or AI-assisted tools is part of the research design or methods (for example, in the field of biomedical imaging). If this is the case, such use must be described in a reproducible manner in the methods section, including the name of the model or tool, version and extension numbers, and manufacturer.

The use of generative AI or AI-assisted tools in the production of artwork such as for graphical abstracts is not permitted. The use of generative AI in the production of cover art may in some cases be allowed, if the author obtains prior permission from the journal editor and publisher, can demonstrate that all necessary rights have been cleared for the use of the relevant material, and ensures that there is correct content attribution.

Supplementary material
We encourage the use of supplementary materials such as applications, images and sound clips to enhance research. Some guidelines:

Supplementary material should be accurate and relevant to the research.

Cite all supplementary files in the manuscript text.

Submit all supplementary materials at the same time as your manuscript.

Include a concise, descriptive caption for each supplementary file, describing its content.

After submission supplementary files can only be added or replaced in the revision stage of the editorial process.

Be aware that all supplementary materials provided will appear online in the exact same way as received. These files will not be checked, formatted or typeset by the production team.

Video
This journal accepts video material and animation sequences to support and enhance your scientific research. We encourage you to include links to video or animation files within articles. Some guidelines:

When including video or animation file links within your article, refer to the video or animation content by adding a note in your text where the file should be placed.

Clearly label files ensuring the given file name is directly related to the file content.

Provide files in one of our recommended file formats. Files should be within our preferred maximum file size of 150 MB per file, 1 GB in total.

Provide "stills" for each of your files. These will be used as standard icons to personalize the link to your video data. You can choose any frame from your video or animation or make a separate image.

Provide descriptive text in your manuscript to refer to the video content. This text helps ensure accessibility for visually impaired readers who rely on descriptive information. For journals publishing in print this is also essential, as video and animation files cannot be embedded in the print version.

We publish all video and animation files supplied in the electronic version of your article.

For more detailed instructions, we recommend that you read our guidelines on submitting video content to be included in the body of an article.

Research data
We are committed to supporting the storage of, access to and discovery of research data, and our research data policy sets out the principles guiding how we work with the research community to support a more efficient and transparent research process.

Research data refers to the results of observations or experimentation that validate research findings, which may also include software, code, models, algorithms, protocols, methods and other useful materials related to the project.

Please read our guidelines on sharing research data for more information on depositing, sharing and using research data and other relevant research materials.

Research data deposit, citation and linking

For this journal, Option C instructions from our research data guidelines apply. This means that you are required to:

Deposit your research data in a relevant data repository.

Cite and link to this dataset in your article.

If this is not possible, make a statement explaining why research data cannot be shared.

Data statement
To foster transparency, you are required to state the availability of any data at submission.

Ensuring data is available may be a requirement of your funding body or institution. If your data is unavailable to access or unsuitable to post, you can state the reason why (e.g., your research data includes sensitive or confidential information such as patient data) during the submission process. This statement will appear with your published article on ScienceDirect.

Read more about the importance and benefits of providing a data statement.

Data linking
Linking to the data underlying your work increases your exposure and may lead to new collaborations. It also provides readers with a better understanding of the described research.

If your research data has been made available in a data repository there are a number of ways your article can be linked directly to the dataset:

Provide a link to your dataset when prompted during the online submission process.

For some data repositories, a repository banner will automatically appear next to your published article on ScienceDirect.

You can also link relevant data or entities within the text of your article through the use of identifiers. Use the following format: Database: 12345 (e.g. TAIR: AT1G01020; CCDC: 734053; PDB: 1XFN).

Learn more about linking research data and research articles in ScienceDirect.

Co-submission of related data, methods or protocols
You are encouraged to publish a description of your research data, methods, or protocols related to your regular article as a co-submission article in Data in Brief or MethodsX.

This co-submission can be submitted at the same time as your regular manuscript submission to this journal. If both your regular and co-submitted manuscripts are accepted for publication, they will be linked together on ScienceDirect, thereby promoting research reproducibility, interoperability, and open science.

Prepare a separate manuscript describing your research data, methods, or protocols using the mandatory templates from Data in Brief or in MethodsX.

Submit this co-submission alongside your regular manuscript as a separate submission item; on the ‘Attach files’ page in Editorial Manager, after which it will be automatically forwarded to the Data in Brief or MethodsX and assigned an editor.

For associated Article Processing Charge (APC) details, please visit:

MethodsX

Data in Brief

Please note: Due to the automated process of submitting to Data in Brief or MethodsX, only after acceptance will you be presented with a personalized OA Article Publishing Charge based on your individual context (your country, institutional affiliation, and any society membership for example).

Please visit co-submission Researcher Support page for more information on how to submit a co-submission.

Article structure
Article sections
Divide your article into clearly defined and numbered sections. Number subsections 1.1 (then 1.1.1, 1.1.2, ...), then 1.2, etc.

Use the numbering format when cross-referencing within your article. Do not just refer to "the text."

You may give subsections a brief heading. Headings should appear on a separate line.

Do not include the article abstract within section numbering.

Theory and calculation
The theory section should lay the foundation for further work by extending the background you provided in the introduction to your article. The calculation section should represent a practical development from a theoretical basis.

Footnotes
We advise you to use footnotes sparingly. If you include footnotes in your article, ensure that they are numbered consecutively.

You may use system features that automatically build footnotes into text. Alternatively, you can indicate the position of footnotes within the text and present them in a separate section at the end of your article.

Acknowledgements
Include any individuals who provided you with help during your research, such as help with language, writing or proof reading, in the acknowledgements section.

Acknowledgements should be placed in a separate section which appears directly before the reference list. Do not include acknowledgements on your title page, as a footnote to your title, or anywhere else in your article other than in the separate acknowledgements section.

Author contributions: CRediT
Corresponding authors are required to acknowledge co-author contributions using CRediT (Contributor Roles Taxonomy) roles:

Conceptualization

Data curation

Formal analysis

Funding acquisition

Investigation

Methodology

Project administration

Resources

Software

Supervision

Validation

Visualization

Writing – original draft

Writing – review and editing

Not all CRediT roles will apply to every manuscript and some authors may contribute through multiple roles.

We advise you to read more about CRediT and view an example of a CRediT author statement.

Appendices
We ask you to use the following format for appendices:

Identify individual appendices within your article using the format: A, B, etc.

Give separate numbering to formulae and equations within appendices using formats such as Eq. (A.1), Eq. (A.2), etc. and in subsequent appendices, Eq. (B.1), Eq. (B. 2) etc. In a similar way, give separate numbering to tables and figures using formats such as Table A.1; Fig. A.1, etc.

Vitae
Please submit a short (maximum 100 words) biography of each author and include a passport-type photograph as a separate figure. Please provide the biography in an editable format (e.g. Word, not in PDF format).

References
References within text
Any references cited within your article should also be present in your reference list and vice versa. Some guidelines:

References cited in your abstract must be given in full.

We recommend that you do not include unpublished results and personal communications in your reference list, though you may mention them in the text of your article.

Any unpublished results and personal communications included in your reference list must follow the standard reference style of the journal. In substitution of the publication date add "unpublished results" or "personal communication."

References cited as "in press" imply that the item has been accepted for publication.

Linking to cited sources will increase the discoverability of your research. We encourage the use of Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) as reference links, as they provide a permanent link to the electronic article referenced.

Before submission, check that all data provided in your reference list are correct, including any references which have been copied. Providing correct reference data allows us to link to abstracting and indexing services such as Scopus, Crossref and PubMed. Any incorrect surnames, journal or book titles, publication years or pagination within your references may prevent link creation.

Reference format
This journal does not set strict requirements on reference formatting at submission. Some guidelines:

References can be in any style or format as long as the style is consistent.

Author names, journal or book titles, chapter or article titles, year of publication, volume numbers, article numbers or pagination must be included, where applicable.

Our journal reference style will be applied to your article after acceptance, at proof stage. If required, at this stage we will ask you to correct or supply any missing reference data.

Reference style
Indicate references by adding a number within square brackets in the text. You can refer to author names within your text, but you must always give the reference number, e.g., "as demonstrated [3,6]. Barnaby and Jones [8] obtained a different result ....".

Number references in the order they appear in your article.   

Abbreviate journal names according to the List of Title Word Abbreviations (LTWA).

Examples:

Reference to a journal publication:

[1] J. van der Geer, T. Handgraaf, R.A. Lupton, The art of writing a scientific article, J. Sci. Commun. 163 (2020) 51 – 59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sc.2020.00372.

Reference to a journal publication with an article number:

[2] J. van der Geer, T. Handgraaf, R.A. Lupton, 2022. The art of writing a scientific article. Heliyon. 19, e00205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e00205.

Reference to a book:

[3] W. Strunk Jr., E.B. White, The Elements of Style, fourth ed., Longman, New York, 2000.

Reference to a chapter in a book:

[4] G.R. Mettam, L.B. Adams, How to prepare an electronic version of your article, in: B.S. Jones, R.Z. Smith (Eds.), Introduction to the Electronic Age, E-Publishing Inc., New York, 2020, pp. 281 - 304.

Reference to a website:

[5] Cancer Research UK, Cancer statistics reports for the UK. http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/aboutcancer/statistics/cancerstatsreport/, 2023 (accessed 13 March 2023).

Reference to a dataset:

[6] M. Oguro, S. Imahiro, S. Saito, T. Nakashizuka, Mortality data for Japanese oak wilt disease and surrounding forest compositions [dataset], Mendeley Data, v1, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1234/abc12nb39r.1.

Reference to software:

[7] E. Coon, M. Berndt, A. Jan, D. Svyatsky, A. Atchley, E. Kikinzon, D. Harp, G. Manzini, E. Shelef, K. Lipnikov, R. Garimella, C. Xu, D. Moulton, S. Karra, S. Painter, E. Jafarov, S. Molins, Advanced Terrestrial Simulator (ATS) v0.88 [software], Zenodo, March 25, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1234/zenodo.3727209.

Web references
When listing web references, as a minimum you should provide the full URL and the date when the reference was last accessed. Additional information (e.g. DOI, author names, dates or reference to a source publication) should also be provided, if known.

You can list web references separately under a new heading directly after your reference list or include them in your reference list.

Data references
We encourage you to cite underlying or relevant datasets within article text and to list data references in the reference list.

When citing data references, you should include:

author name(s)

dataset title

data repository

version (where available)

year

global persistent identifier

Add [dataset] immediately before your reference. This will help us to properly identify the dataset. The [dataset] identifier will not appear in your published article.

Software references
Cite software (including computational code, scripts, models, notebooks and libraries) in the same way as other sources of information to support proper attribution and credit, reproducibility, collaboration and reuse, and encourage building on the work of others to further research. To facilitate this, useful information is provided in this article on the essentials of software citation by FORCE 11, of which Elsevier is a member.

A reference to software should include the following elements:

Creator(s): the authors or project that developed the software.

Title: the name of the software.

Publication venue: the publication venue of the software, preferably, an archive or repository that provides permanent identifiers.

Date: the date the software was published. This is the date associated with a release or version of the software, or “n.d.” if the date is unknown.

Identifier: a resolvable pointer to the software, preferably, a PID that resolves to a landing page containing descriptive metadata about the software, similar to how a Digital Object Identifier (DOI) for a paper that points to a page about the paper rather than directly to a representation of the paper, such as the PDF. DOIs are preferable, and other examples of PIDs include Handles, RRIDs, ASCL IDs, swMath IDs, Software Heritage IDs, ARK Alliance, etc. If there is no PID for the software, a URL to where the software exists may be the best identifier available.

Version: the identifier for the version of the software being referenced. If the version is unidentified or unknown, the date of access should be used.

Type: some reference styles (e.g., APA), require a bracketed description of the citation (e.g., [Computer software]) to be included.